What are you sitting down for? I was going to milk that for a while. You guys can stretch that out
in the post, make that longer in the edit. Thank you all.
I brought one of my paintings, I hope… It’s not one of my bigger pieces, so you might want to
move up front to get a good look at it.
Faculty, friends…grad class of 2014 and all the dead baseball players coming out of the corn to
be with us today. After the harvest there is no place for them to hide, the fields are empty. There
is no cover there.
I’m here to plant a seed today, a seed that will inspire you to move forward in life with
enthusiastic hearts and a clear sense of wholeness. The question is will that seed have a
chance to take root? Or will I be sued by Monsanto and be forced to use their seed, which may
not be totally ayurvedic.
Excuse me if I seem a little bit low energy tonight, today, whatever this is? I slept with my head
to the North last night. Oh man, oh man, you know how that is, right kids? Yeah, woke up right in
the middle of pitta, couldn’t get back to sleep until vata rode around? Crazy, oh, woo, whooo…
But I didn’t freak out. I used that time to eat a large meal, connect with someone special on
Tinder.
Because life doesn’t happen to you, it happens for you. How do I know this? I don’t, but I’m
making sound and that’s the important thing. That’s what I’m here to do.
Sometimes I think, that’s the only thing that is important, you know. It’s just letting each other
know that we’re here, reminding each other that we’re part of a larger self.
I used to think that Jim Carrey was all that I was, just a flickering light, a dancing shadow.
The great nothing masquerading as something you can name, seeking shelter in caves and
foxholes dug out hastily.
An archer searching for his target in the mirror, wounded only by my own arrows, begging to be
enslaved, pleading for my chains, blinded by longing and tripping over paradise.
You didn’t think I could be serious, did ya? I don’t think you understand who you’re dealing with.
I have no limits. I cannot be contained because I’m the container. You can’t contain the
container, man. You can’t contain the container.
I used to believe that whoever I was ended at the edge of my skin, that I’d been given this little
vehicle called the body from which to experience creation, as though I couldn’t have asked for a
sportier model. It was after all a loaner and would have to be returned.
Then I learned that everything outside the vehicle was part of me, too. And now I drive a
convertible. Yeah, man, top down, wind in my hair, woo.
I am elated and truly, truly, truly excited to be present and fully connected to you at this
important moment in your journey. I hope you’re ready to open the roof and take it all in?
Okay, 4 more years then? They’re obviously not ready.
I want to thank the trustees, the adminstrators, the faculty of MUM for creating an institution
worthy of Maharishi’s ideals of education. A place that teaches knowledge and experience, the
knowledge and experience necessary to be productive in life as well as enabling the students
through transcendental meditation and ancient Vedic knowledge to slack off twice a day for an
hour and a half.
Don’t think you’re fooling me, but I guess it has some benefits. It does allow you to separate
what you truly are and what’s real from the stories that run through your head.
You have given them the ability to walk behind the mind’s elaborate set decoration and to see,
that there is a huge difference between a dog that is going to eat you in your mind and an actual
dog that is going to eat you.
That may sound like no big deal, but many don’t learn that distinction, and they spend a great
deal of their lives living in fight or flight response.
I’d like to acknowledge all of you wonderful parents. Way to go, what a fantastic job you have
done for your tireless dedication, your love, your support. Most of all for the attention that you
paid to your children.
I have a saying: Beware of the unloved, because they will eventually hurt themselves or me.
But when I look at this group here, I feel really safe, l do. I’m just going to say it: My room is not
locked, my room is not locked.
No doubt some of you will turn out to be crooks, but white collar stuff, Wall Street, you know,
that type of thing. You know crimes committed by people with self-esteem. Stuff parents can still
be proud of in a weird way.
And to the graduating class of 2017 minus 3…you didn’t let me finish, congratulations. Yes, give
yourself a round of applause, please. You are the vanguard of knowledge and consciousness, a
new wave in a vast ocean of possibilities.
On the other side of that door, there is a world starving for new ideas, new leadership.
I’ve been out there for 30 years. She’s a wild cat, oh, she’ll rub up against your leg and purr until
you pick her up and start petting her, and then out of nowhere she’ll swat you in the face. It can
be rough out there, but that’s okay, because there’s soft serve ice cream with sprinkles. I guess
that’s what I’m really trying to say here today. Sometimes it’s okay to eat your feelings.
Now fear is going to be a player in your life, but you get to decide how much.
You could spend your whole life imagining ghosts, worrying about the pathway to the future, but
all there will ever be is what’s happening here, and the decisions we make in this moment,
which are based in either love or fear.
So many of us choose our path out of fear disguised as practicality.
What we really want seems impossibly out of reach and ridiculous to expect, so we never dare
to ask the universe for it.
I’m saying: I’m the proof, that you can ask the universe for it - please - and if it doesn’t happen
for you right away, it’s only because the universe is so busy fulfilling my order…party size!
My father could have been a great comedian, but he didn’t believe that that was possible for
him. So he made a conservative choice instead. He got a safe job as an accountant. And when I
was 12 years old, he was let go from that safe job, and our family had to do whatever we could
to survive.
I learned many great lessons from my father, not the least of which was that you can fail at what
you don’t want, so you might as well take a chance on doing what you love.
It’s not the only thing he taught me though, you know. I watched the effect of my father’s love
and humor and how it altered the world around me and I thought: That’s something to do, that’s
something worth my time.
It wasn’t long until I started acting up. You know poeple would come over to the house and
they’d be greeted by a 7 year old throwing himself down a large flight of stairs.
They’d say: What happened, and I’d say: I don’t know, let’s check the replay. I’d go back to the
top of the stairs and come back down in slow motion. It was a very strange household. My
father used to brag that I wasn’t a ham, I was the whole pig.
He treated my talent as if it was his second chance. When I was about 28 after a decade as a
professional comedian, I realized one night in LA that the purpose of my life had always been to
free people from concern, just like my dad.
And when I realized this, I dubbed my new devotion “The Church of Freedom From Concern” -
the Church of FFC. And I dedicated myself to that ministry.
What’s yours? How will you serve the world? What did they need that your talent could provide?
That’s all you have to figure out.
As someone who’s done what you’re about to go and do, I can tell you from experience, the
effect you have on others is the most valuable currency there is, because everything you gain in
life will rot and fall apart, and all that is left of you is what was in your heart.
My choosing to free people from concern got me from to top of the mountain. Look where I am,
look what I get to do everywhere I go. I’m going to get emotional, because when I tap into this, it
really is extraordinary to me.
I did something that made people present their best selves to me wherever I go. I am at the top
of the mountain. And I was. And the only one I hadn’t freed was myself, and that’s where my
search for identity deepened.
I wondered who I’d be without my fame? Who would I be if I said things that people didn’t want
to hear? Or if I defied their expectations of me? What if I showed up to the party without my
Mardi Gras bat mask and refused to flash my breasts for a handful of beads? I’ll give you a
moment to wipe that image out of your mind.
But you guys are so ahead of the game. You already know who you are.
And that peace, that peace that we’re after lies somewhere beyond personality, beyond the
perception of others, beyond invention and disguise, even beyond effort itself.
You can join the game, fight the wars, play with the form all you want, but to find real peace, you
have to let the armor go.
Your need for acceptance can make you invisible in this world.
Don’t let anything stand in the way of the light that shines through this form. Risk being seen in
all of your glory.
(Painting unveiled.) It’s not big enough. This painting is big for a reason. It’s called “High
Visibility.” It’s about picking up the light and daring to be seen.
Here is the tricky part, everyone is attracted to the light.
The Party Host, up at the top, who thinks unconsciousness is bliss, and is always offering to
drink from the bottles that empty you.
Misery, below her, despises the light, can’t stand when you’re doing well, wishes you nothing
but the worst.
The Queen of Diamonds, under him, needs a King to build her house of cards.
And the Hollow One, down bottom there, will cling to your leg and say: Please don’t leave me
behind for I have abandoned myself.
Even those who are closest to you and most in love with you, the people you love most in the
world will find clarity confronting you at times.
This painting took me thousands of hours to complete, and when I was finished (applause)
thank you. That’s thousands of hours. Yes, I’ll never get them back, I’ll never get them back.
I worked on this so long. It was weeks and weeks. Like a madman, I was alone on a scaffolding.
And when I was finished, one of my friends said: This would be a cool black lit painting, so I
started over - wooo. Welcome to Burning Man.
Some pretty crazy characters up there, but better up there than in here (points to head).
You know, painting is one of the ways I free myself from concern. It’s a way to stop the world
through total mental, physical and spiritual involvement.
But even with that comes a feeling of divine dissatisfaction.
Because ultimately, we’re not the avatars we create. We’re not the pictures on the film stock.
We’re the light that shines through. All else is just smoke and mirrors, distracting but not truly
compelling.
I’ve often said that I wish people would realize all their dreams, wealth and fame, so that they
could see, that it’s not where you’re going to find your sense of completion.
Like many of you, I was concerned about going out into the world and doing something bigger
than myself until someone smarter than myself made me realize, that there is nothing bigger
than myself.
My soul is not contained within the limits of my body. My body is contained within the
limitlessness of my soul. One unified field.
One unified field dancing for no particular reason, except maybe to comfort and entertain itself.
As that shift happens in you, you’ll be feeling the world, you’ll be felt by it, you’ll be embraced by
it.
Now I’m always at the beginning, I have a reset button, and I ride that button constantly.
Once that button is functioning in your life, there is no story that the mind can create that will be
as compelling. The imagination is always manufacturing scenarios, both good and bad, and the
ego tries to keep you trapped in the multiplex of the mind.
Our eyes are not viewers, they’re also projectors that are running a second story over the
picture, that we see in front of us all the time.
Fear is writing that script and the working title is “I’ll never be enough.”
Now you’re going to look at a person like me and say: How could we ever hope to reach those
kind of heights, Jim? How can we make a painting that’s too big for our home? How do you fly
so high without a special breathing apparatus?
This is the voice of the ego, and if you listen to it, there will always be someone who is doing
better than you.
No matter what you gain, ego will not let you rest. It will tell you that you cannot stop until you’ve
left an indelible mark on the earth, until you’ve achieved immortality.
How tricky is this ego, that it would tempt us with something that we already possess?
So I just want you to relax, you know, that’s my job. Relax and dream up a good life.
I had a substitute teacher from Ireland in second grade, that told my class during morning
prayer that when she wanted something, anything at all, she prays for it and promises
something in return and she always gets what she wants.
Well, I’m sitting at the back of the classroom, you know, thinking my family can’t afford a bike.
So I went home and I prayed for one, and I promised I would recite the rosary every night in
exchange - broke it, broke that promise.
But two weeks I got home from school to find a brand new Mustang bike with a banana seat and
Easy rider handlebars, yeah! From fool to cool.
My family informed me that I’d won the bike in a raffle that a friend of mine had entered my
name in without my knowledge, whatsoever, so that type of thing has been happening to me
ever since.
As far as I can tell, it’s just about letting the universe know what you want and working toward it,
while letting go of how it comes to pass.
Your job is not to figure out how it’s going to happen for you, but to open the door in your head.
And when the door opens in real life, just walk through it.
And don’t worry if you miss your cue, because there’s always door opening. They keep opening.
And when I say: Life doesn’t happen to you, it happens for you. I really don’t know if that is true.
I’m just making a conscious choice to perceive challenges as something beneficial that I can
deal with anything in a productive way. You’ll come up with your own style. That’s part of the fun.
Oh, and why not take a chance on faith as well? Take a chance on faith. Not religion, but faith.
Not hope, but faith.
I don’t believe in hope. Hope is a beggar. Hope walks through the fire, and faith leaps over it.
You are ready and able to do beautiful things in this world, and after you walk through those
doors today, you will only ever have two choices: love or fear.
Choose love, and don’t ever let fear turn you against your playful heart.
Thank you so much. I’m so honored. I love you.
